.\" Copyright (c) 2025
.\"     Chris Moerz <freebsd@ny-central.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 1, 2025
.Dt FRAMEWORK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm framework
.Nd frame.work compatibility and systems driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
System driver and optimization tweaks for
frame.work notebooks.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides system optimizations for use of FreeBSD
on frame.work notebooks.
.Pp
Currently,
.Nm
provides one key functionality - dynamically dimming the screen when
the computer is not used, and turning up brightness again once
activity by the user is detected.
.Pp
.Nm
keeps track of input signals through
.Xr evdev 4
and after a set timeout period, in which no input was detected, reduces
screen brightness.
Upon user input, it immediately increases screen brightness back to
previous levels.
.Pp
Brightness levels for dimmed and bright state, as well as timeout
settings (the length of time that needs to pass without any input
signal before dimming the screen) can be customized through sysctls.
Those values can be set differently for when the laptop runs on power
outlet, or on battery.
.Pp
.Nm
introduces the following sysctls, all found under the root node
"hw.framework"; each of the following sysctls must therefore be
prefixed with "hw.framework." to be accessed:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "hw.framework.devnode12345" -compact
.It power.powermode
(read-only) tells which power mode the module is operating in - either PWR for
power outlet or BAT for battery mode
.It screen.brightness_current
(read-only) tells the currently active brightness level on a scale
from 0 to 100
.It dimblock
can be used to block the driver from dimming the screen, i.e. while
playing back a video.
.Pp
This value can only be incremented or decremented; it is not possible
to set an absolute value.
.Bl -bullet
.It
To increment the value, set any value >0.
.It
To decrement, set the value to 0.
.El
.Pp
This allows you to wrap any video playback scripts with a sysctl
command that increments or decrements this value, without having to
consider how many video playback applications are active concurrently.
.It screen.battery
root node containing customization sysctls for BAT mode, active when
laptop is running on battery
.It screen.power
root node containing customization sysctls for PWR mode, active when
laptop is plugged into power outlet
.El
.Pp
Both nodes - for BAT mode "hw.framework.screen.battery", and for PWR
mode "hw.framework.screen.power", provide the following child nodes
for further customization:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "hw.framework..." -compact
.It timeout_secs
number of seconds of inactivity until screen is dimmed
.It brightness_high
brightness level to set when system is in use and input is detected
.It brightness_low
brightness level when system is inactive and no input is detected, set
after timeout_secs seconds of inactivity
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr acpiconf 8 ,
.Xr backlight 8 ,
.Xr drm 7 ,
.Xr evdev 4 ,
.Xr framework-dbus 1 ,
.Xr kldload 8 ,
.Xr kldunload 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 13.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by Chris Moerz <freebsd@ny-central.og>.
.Sh CAVEATS
This driver requires recent drm-kmod drivers installed and enabled to
work properly.
.Pp
Right now, the driver does not yet allow providing video playback
hints, which will lead to reduced screen brightness during video
playback.
To avoid this, one may either unload the driver, or use the
disable sysctl to temporarily disable screen dimming, for example
through a script.
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
The following bugs are known issues with the current version:
.Bl -bullet
.It
This driver happens to work on non-frame.work devices.
.It
The dimblock sysctl can be set, but the driver does not (yet) respect it.
.El
.Sh NOTES
The
.Nm
driver emerged as work product from the Laptop and Desktop Work Group
in February 2025.
